Data tiering (#2163)
timescale/docs: cloud/data-tiering/about-data-tiering.md

[data tiering API documentation][data-tiering-api].

## Limitations

*   **Limited schema modifications.** Some schema modifications are not allowed
    on hypertables with tiered chunks.

    _Allowed_ modifications include: renaming the hypertable, adding columns
    with `NULL` defaults, adding indexes, changing or renaming the hypertable
    schema, and adding `CHECK` constraints. For `CHECK` constraints, only
    untiered data is verified.

    _Disallowed_ modifications include: adding a column with non-`NULL`
    defaults, renaming a column, deleting a column, changing the data type of a
    column, and adding a `NOT NULL` constraint to the column.

*   **Limited data changes.** You cannot insert data into, update, or delete a
    tiered chunk. These limitations take effect as soon as the chunk is
    scheduled for tiering.

*   **Inefficient query planner filtering for non-native data types.** The query
    planner speeds up reads from object storage by using metadata to filter out
    columns and row groups that don't satisfy the query. This works for all
    native data types, but not for non-native types, such as `JSON`, `JSONB`,
    and `GIS`.

> 

Reviewer: I would also add the latency tradeoffs from the [limitations section in the enablement doc](https://docs.google.com/document/d/1uFUDD-AMrpVIcqB3TxCksa2aONRzQoc5wzNQKSna4ms/edit#heading=h.m6mm7hjjbwxp). But we can go out without this as well

```suggestion

*   **Latency tradeoffs.** S3 has a much higher latency than EBS. Latency for
    S3 is in the 100s of milliseconds vs 1-10ms latency for EBS volumes. That can
    affect the execution time of queries, especially lighter queries in latency
    sensitive environments.

```

    when it's distributed across different storage layers. Your hypertable is
    spread across the layers, so queries and `JOIN`s work and fetch the same
    data as usual.

## Architecture

Data tiering works by periodically and asynchronously moving older chunks to S3
storage. There, it's stored in the Apache Parquet format, which is a compressed
columnar format well-suited for S3. Data remains accessible both during and
after migration.

When you run regular SQL queries, a behind-the-scenes process transparently
pulls data from wherever it's located: disk storage, object storage, or both.
Various SQL optimizations limit what needs to be read from S3:

*   Chunk exclusion avoids processing chunks that fall outside the query's time
    window
*   The database uses metadata about row groups and columnar offsets, so only
    part of an object needs to be read from S3

The result is transparent queries across standard PostgreSQL storage and S3
storage, so your queries fetch the same data as before, with minimal added
latency.

For more about how data tiering works, see the
[blog post on data tiering][blog-data-tiering].

> For more about using data tiering in your applications, see the
> [data tiering API documentation][data-tiering-api].

Author: ```suggestion
```

Removing this for now, since we don't have the content.

## Limitations

*   **Limited schema modifications.** Some schema modifications are not allowed
    on hypertables with tiered chunks.

    _Allowed_ modifications include: renaming the hypertable, adding columns
    with `NULL` defaults, adding indexes, changing or renaming the hypertable
    schema, and adding `CHECK` constraints. For `CHECK` constraints, only
    untiered data is verified.

    _Disallowed_ modifications include: adding a column with non-`NULL`
    defaults, renaming a column, deleting a column, changing the data type of a
    column, and adding a `NOT NULL` constraint to the column.

*   **Limited data changes.** You cannot insert data into, update, or delete a
    tiered chunk. These limitations take effect as soon as the chunk is
    scheduled for tiering.

*   **Inefficient query planner filtering for non-native data types.** The query
    planner speeds up reads from object storage by using metadata to filter out
    columns and row groups that don't satisfy the query. This works for all
    native data types, but not for non-native types, such as `JSON`, `JSONB`,
    and `GIS`.

> *   **Latency tradeoffs.** S3 has a much higher latency than EBS. Latency for
>     S3 is in the 100s of milliseconds vs 1-10ms latency for EBS volumes. That can
>     affect the execution time of queries, especially lighter queries in latency
>     sensitive environments.

Author: ```suggestion
*   **Latency.** S3 has much higher latency than EBS. Latency for S3 is in 
     the 100s of milliseconds, compared to 1-10ms latency for EBS volumes. 
     This can affect the execution time of queries, especially lighter queries 
     in latency-sensitive environments.
```

## Learn more

Learn [how data tiering works][how-to].

[blog-data-tiering]: https://www.timescale.com/blog/expanding-the-boundaries-of-postgresql-announcing-a-bottomless-consumption-based-object-storage-layer-built-on-amazon-s3/
[how-to]: /cloud/:currentVersion:/data-tiering/tier-data-object-storage/

> [data-tiering-api]: /api/:currentVersion:/FIXME/

Author: ```suggestion
```

---
title: Data tiering
excerpt: Save on storage costs by tiering older data to separate storage
product: cloud
keywords: [data tiering]
tags: [storage, data management]
cloud_ui:
    path:
        - [services, :serviceID, operations, data-tiering]
    priority: 1
---

> import ExperimentalPrivateBeta from 'versionContent/_partials/_early_access.mdx';

Author: That's just the name of the partial, the actual content of the partial doesn't use those terms.

import TieringBeta from 'versionContent/_partials/_cloud-data-tiering-beta.mdx';

# Data tiering

> Save on storage costs by tiering data to a low-cost object-storage layer.

Author: This is all in the next para, so let's leave this simple marketing message sentence the way it is. I've edited the next para a little to make sure we've included your content above ☝️
